README.md, before:

# Forge

This is a tool for scalable local development for larger teams.

It attempts to solve several problems:

* How do I keep a group of developers in sync?
* How do enable my developers to compile or transpile a codebase that is subject to change at any moment?
* How do I scale my toolchain without having to rewrite my toolchain or force developers to learn a new tool?
* How do I handle developers who don't know their way around a shell?
* How do I minimize the number of commands I must memorize to make my application run?

## Containerization

It's important to mention that Forge is not seeking to replace containerization i.e. Docker, but is intended to complement it. When it comes to env setup and config, containerization is the best solution; but containerization does not solve how to run or develop an application; nor does it deal well with the idiosyncrasies of varying language-based package managers, without resulting to long container initialization times and tedious curation. This is where Forge comes in.

## Install
```
git clone git@github.com:quidmonkey/forge.git ~/.forge && ~/.forge/install
```

## Build Notes

If you using forge to generate your build artifact, you will likely not want to run the install script. Instead, clone down the forge repo to your build server and invoke the `forge` executable directly with whatever build tasks you may need e.g. `forge build`.

## How It Works

When the `install` executable is run, it creates a global `forge` cmd in `/usr/local/bin` for every developer to run on their machine. The `install` executable also prompts for a target project directory and creates a `.forge/` directory within the project root. This `.forge/` directory contains a `tasks/` directory full various executable scripts called tasks. These tasks can be written in any language by using a `/usr/bin/env` invocation, and they can do whatever the project requires. No longer does the project need to be chained to a specific toolchain e.g. `maven` or `gulp`. Instead, forge acts a proxy for these tasks, offering a simple interface that only needs to be learned once.

To run a forge task, run:
```script
forge task
```

To run the default task, run:
```script
forge
```

To get help, run:
```script
forge -h
```

To get help for a specific task, run:
```script
forge task -h
```

To list all available forge tasks, run:
```script
forge -t
```

Other commands exist to make the development experience easier. Run `forge -h` to find out more.

## Tasks

Dig into the `tasks/` directory of this repo or a project you installed forge into for examples of how to create your own tasks. To create a task, all that is required is to add a task to the `tasks/` directory that includes a `/usr/bin/env` invocation. Whatever the task is named is how the task will be invoked by forge e.g. I create a `tests` task to run my project's specs, and I invoke it using `forge tests`.

The one task that must always exist is the `default` task, which is installed by default. The thinking behind this task is that the entire dev toolchain can be dumped into it, so that all developers must do is run `forge` to begin development on a project.

It is encouraged that task documentation be added for every task. This is done by leaving a multiline comment annotated with `@forge` directives. This documentation is what will be displayed in the terminal when the `forge task -h` cmd is run. See the included examples tasks to see how it is done.

## Version Control

One of the central problems of local development is version control. While Forge does not seek to replace containerization, it does seek to keep to complement and simplify the process of version control during development. Forge exposes a `version_control` function that takes two parameters: a file that lists project dependencies (e.g. `package.json` or `requirements.txt`) and a cmd to execute if the file is stale (e.g. `npm install` or `pip install`. Forge handles version control by caching a copy of the dependencies file that it is given to version control. Each time a `version_control` cmd is run for the file, Forge checks for an associated file of the same name in its cache, and then diffs the current file with the cached version. If a difference is found, the associated cmd is executed to bring the file up-to-date, and then the cache is updated with the new file.

If `version_control` is used within a task that a developer runs all the time i.e. the `default` task, then version control is always exerted on the codebase, and the developer never has to manual check for updates to project dependencies. No more will a developer have to run `npm install` or `pip install` or be told that a new dependency has been added to the codebase. It will all be taken care of seamlessly by forge as it is run. It is encouraged by make use of `version_control` with all dependency files, especially within the `default` task.

See the use of `version_control` in the default task and the `version_control.sh` file for more info.

## Closing Remarks

In a nutshell, Forge can be thought of as "the one command to rule them all." Some may argue that they prefer experienced developers to something so simple, but one wonders if they have had the experience of dealing with broken machines on a daily basis, or running a complex set of cmds as a project matures, or having to rewrite the toolchain because the project far out-scaled what was originally envisioned. Forge offers a single interface to gently introduce developers to the cmd line, while offering up the ability for experienced developers to go wild creating tasks and modify Forge to their heart's content (and please submit good ideas as pull requests!).

Forge was created to be scalable and toolchain agnostic. It was written in Bash, because Bash is the original JavaScript, being ubiquitous; it is fast; and it allows the flexibility to run any script in any language.

Now go out, and Forge!

## Api

```script
debug string
```

Logs a string if `$DEBUG` is set to true by passing the `-d` flag to forge.

```script
error string
```

Logs an error

```script
get_time
```

Get the current timestamp in milliseconds. Be aware that this function can add overhead, especially for MacOS, which does not support millisecond accuracy for the Bash `date` cmd. Or order to achieve millisecond accuracy, MacOS must make calls to a system language. It may be better to invoke forge with the `time` cmd e.g. `time forge`.

```script
is_mac_os
```

Returns true, if the current OS is MacOS; false, otherwise.

```script
list_tasks
```
Lists the available forge tasks in a project.

```script
log string
```

Logs a string.

```script
run_task task options
```

Runs a task of the same name in the `.forge/tasks` directory. Any Bash task will be sourced, allowing access to the forge api. Any non-Bash task will be executed in a sub-shell. All options invoked with Forge will be passed down to the task that is run.

```script
task_usage task
```

Prints the documentation for any forge task that has been annotated using the `@forge` directives.

```script
usage
```

Prints the documentation for forge

Commit message:

Updated get_date util function to check for gdate on MacOS and favor it over Ruby for perf.

README.md, after:

# Forge

This is a tool for scalable local development for larger teams.

It attempts to solve several problems:

* How do I keep a group of developers in sync?
* How do enable my developers to compile or transpile a codebase that is subject to change at any moment?
* How do I scale my toolchain without having to rewrite my toolchain or force developers to learn a new tool?
* How do I handle developers who don't know their way around a shell?
* How do I minimize the number of commands I must memorize to make my application run?

## Containerization

It's important to mention that Forge is not seeking to replace containerization i.e. Docker, but is intended to complement it. When it comes to env setup and config, containerization is the best solution; but containerization does not solve how to run or develop an application; nor does it deal well with the idiosyncrasies of varying language-based package managers, without resulting to long container initialization times and tedious curation. This is where Forge comes in.

## Install
```
git clone git@github.com:quidmonkey/forge.git ~/.forge && ~/.forge/install
```

## Build Notes

If you using forge to generate your build artifact, you will likely not want to run the install script. Instead, clone down the forge repo to your build server and invoke the `forge` executable directly with whatever build tasks you may need e.g. `forge build`.

## How It Works

When the `install` executable is run, it creates a global `forge` cmd in `/usr/local/bin` for every developer to run on their machine. The `install` executable also prompts for a target project directory and creates a `.forge/` directory within the project root. This `.forge/` directory contains a `tasks/` directory full various executable scripts called tasks. These tasks can be written in any language by using a `/usr/bin/env` invocation, and they can do whatever the project requires. No longer does the project need to be chained to a specific toolchain e.g. `maven` or `gulp`. Instead, forge acts a proxy for these tasks, offering a simple interface that only needs to be learned once.

To run a forge task, run:
```script
forge task
```

To run the default task, run:
```script
forge
```

To get help, run:
```script
forge -h
```

To get help for a specific task, run:
```script
forge task -h
```

To list all available forge tasks, run:
```script
forge -t
```

Other commands exist to make the development experience easier. Run `forge -h` to find out more.

## Tasks

Dig into the `tasks/` directory of this repo or a project you installed forge into for examples of how to create your own tasks. To create a task, all that is required is to add a task to the `tasks/` directory that includes a `/usr/bin/env` invocation. Whatever the task is named is how the task will be invoked by forge e.g. I create a `tests` task to run my project's specs, and I invoke it using `forge tests`.

The one task that must always exist is the `default` task, which is installed by default. The thinking behind this task is that the entire dev toolchain can be dumped into it, so that all developers must do is run `forge` to begin development on a project.

It is encouraged that task documentation be added for every task. This is done by leaving a multiline comment annotated with `@forge` directives. This documentation is what will be displayed in the terminal when the `forge task -h` cmd is run. See the included examples tasks to see how it is done.

## Version Control

One of the central problems of local development is version control. While Forge does not seek to replace containerization, it does seek to keep to complement and simplify the process of version control during development. Forge exposes a `version_control` function that takes two parameters: a file that lists project dependencies (e.g. `package.json` or `requirements.txt`) and a cmd to execute if the file is stale (e.g. `npm install` or `pip install`. Forge handles version control by caching a copy of the dependencies file that it is given to version control. Each time a `version_control` cmd is run for the file, Forge checks for an associated file of the same name in its cache, and then diffs the current file with the cached version. If a difference is found, the associated cmd is executed to bring the file up-to-date, and then the cache is updated with the new file.

If `version_control` is used within a task that a developer runs all the time i.e. the `default` task, then version control is always exerted on the codebase, and the developer never has to manual check for updates to project dependencies. No more will a developer have to run `npm install` or `pip install` or be told that a new dependency has been added to the codebase. It will all be taken care of seamlessly by forge as it is run. It is encouraged by make use of `version_control` with all dependency files, especially within the `default` task.

See the use of `version_control` in the default task and the `version_control.sh` file for more info.

## Closing Remarks

In a nutshell, Forge can be thought of as "the one command to rule them all." Some may argue that they prefer experienced developers to something so simple, but one wonders if they have had the experience of dealing with broken machines on a daily basis, or running a complex set of cmds as a project matures, or having to rewrite the toolchain because the project far out-scaled what was originally envisioned. Forge offers a single interface to gently introduce developers to the cmd line, while offering up the ability for experienced developers to go wild creating tasks and modify Forge to their heart's content (and please submit good ideas as pull requests!).

Forge was created to be scalable and toolchain agnostic. It was written in Bash, because Bash is the original JavaScript, being ubiquitous; it is fast; and it allows the flexibility to run any script in any language.

Now go out, and Forge!

## Api

```script
command_exists cmd
```

Tests if a command exists, and returns true if it does, or false, otherwise.

```script
debug string
```

Logs a string if `$DEBUG` is set to true by passing the `-d` flag to forge.

```script
error string
```

Logs an error

```script
get_time
```

Get the current timestamp in milliseconds. Be aware that this function can add overhead, especially for MacOS, which does not support millisecond accuracy for the Bash `date` cmd. Or order to achieve millisecond accuracy, MacOS will first check to see if GNU utils have been installed, and if not, must make calls to a system language. It may be better to invoke forge with the `time` cmd e.g. `time forge`.

```script
is_mac_os
```

Returns true, if the current OS is MacOS; false, otherwise.

```script
list_tasks
```
Lists the available forge tasks in a project.

```script
log string
```

Logs a string.

```script
run_task task options
```

Runs a task of the same name in the `.forge/tasks` directory. Any Bash task will be sourced, allowing access to the forge api. Any non-Bash task will be executed in a sub-shell. All options invoked with Forge will be passed down to the task that is run.

```script
task_usage task
```

Prints the documentation for any forge task that has been annotated using the `@forge` directives.

```script
usage
```

Prints the documentation for forge
